# Trace Event Logger

This logger is based on JUL to allow fast JSON traces to be written to disk. It is not lockless or nanosecond precise, but is fast and simple to use and configure.

A snapshot taker is provided in order to write slow transactions onto disk.

An asynchronous writer is available for putting the IO bottleneck on another thread. It is typically much faster than the FileHandler from JUL.

This is a logger helper designed to facilitate entry-exit analysis. The events generated by this logger are saved in a JSON-like message format, providing extra information associated with each event. The typical event types include:

- **Durations:**
  - **B:** Begin
  - **E:** End
  - **X:** Complete (event with a duration field)
  - **i:** Instant / Info

- **Asynchronous Nested Messages:**
  - **b:** Nested Begin
  - **n:** Nested Info
  - **e:** Nested End

- **Flows:**
  - **s:** Flow Begin
  - **t:** Flow Step (Info)
  - **f:** Flow End

- **Object Tracking:**
  - **N:** Object Created
  - **D:** Object Destroyed

- **Mark Events:**
  - **R:** Marker Event

- **Counter Events:**
  - **C:** Counter Event

## Usage

To use **durations** and/or **flows**, refer to ScopeLog and FlowScopeLog. Durations are typically used to instrument simple methods, while flows are preferred when there are links to be made with other threads.

To use **Asynchronous Nested Messages**, check traceAsyncStart and traceAsyncEnd].

To use **Object Tracking**, see traceObjectCreation and traceObjectDestruction.

To use free form tracing, check traceInstant.

### Examples


To instrument

```java
import java.io.FileWriter;

public class SlappyWag {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println("The program will write hello 10x between two scope logs\n");
        try (FileWriter fw = new FileWriter("test.txt")) {
            for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
                fw.write("Hello world "+ i);
            }
        }
    }
}
```

one needs to add to the try-with-resources block a scopewriter

```java
import java.io.FileWriter;
import java.util.logging.Level;
import java.util.logging.Logger;
import org.eclipse.tracecompass.traceeventlogger.LogUtils;

public class SlappyWag {
    
    private static Logger logger = Logger.getAnonymousLogger();
    
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        // Set the logger level based on your requirements
        // logger.setLevel(Level.FINE);

        System.out.println("The program will write hello 10x between two scope logs\n");
        try (LogUtils.ScopeLog sl = new LogUtils.ScopeLog(logger, Level.FINE, "writing to file"); FileWriter fw = new FileWriter("test.txt")) {
            for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
                fw.write("Hello world "+ i);
            }
        }
    }
}
```
Will generate the following trace

```json
{"ts":0,"ph":"B","tid":1,"name":"writing to file"}
{"ts":100000,"ph":"E","tid":1}
```

example 2:

```java
try (LogUtils.ScopeLog linksLogger = new LogUtils.ScopeLog(logger, Level.CONFIG, "Perform Query")) { //$NON-NLS-1$
  ss.updateAllReferences();
  dataStore.addAll(ss.query(ts, trace));
}
```

will generate the following trace

```json
{"ts":12345,"ph":"B","tid":1,"name":"Perform Query"}
{"ts":12366,"ph":"E","tid":1}
```
See more examples in javadoc.

**P.S.: You may need to terminate the logger thread at the end of your program since the library cannot terminate it automatically.**
```Java
import java.util.logging.LogManager;
import java.util.logging.Logger;

public class SlappyWag {

  private static Logger logger = Logger.getAnonymousLogger();

  public static void main (String[] args) {
    // Your code
    // ...
    
    LogManager.getLogManager().reset();

    // End of your program
  }

}
```

## Viewing results

While one could open the traces in their favorite text editor, results are better with a GUI. One could open the resulting json files in either `chrome://tracing` or [Eclipse Trace Compass](https://eclipse.dev/tracecompass/). You will need to install trace event parser support by clicking on the `Tools->Add-ons...` menu and selecting **Trace Compass TraceEvent Parser** in trace compass to load the JSON files. If the trace is malformed due to a handler not being configured properly, the program `jsonify.py` supplied in the root of the project can help restore it. 

```console
// python 3 jsonify.py -input -output
python3 jsonify.py LOG_FILE log.json
```

Another option would be to add the `-DenableMonitoring=true` flag to enable the JMX beans counters. These can be read using VisualVM or jconsole.

[Video tutorial](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YCdzmcpOrK4)

## Performance

On an Intel i5-1145G7 @ 2.60GHz with an NVME hard drive, using an `AsyncFileHandler` instead of the classic `FileHandler` leads to events being logged from 45 us/event (`FileHandler`) to 1.1 us/event (`AsyncFileHandler`). In other words, `AsyncFileHandler` can write 900k events in the time it takes FileHandler to write 22k events
One could also take advantage of the cache effect. If the data is not saturating the IO, speed is even higher.

| Action                         | Overhead |
|--------------------------------|---------:|
| Instrumentation                |    72 ns |
| AsyncFileHandler               |  1100 ns |
| FileHandler                    | 45000 ns |
| Beans-Enabled AsyncFileHandler |  1400 ns |

## Design Philosophy

The design philosophy of this class is heavily inspired by the trace event format of Google. The full specification is available [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1CvAClvFfyA5R-PhYUmn5OOQtYMH4h6I0nSsKchNAySU/edit?pli=1#).

The main goals of this logger helper are clarity of output and simplicity for the developer. While performance is a nice-to-have, it is not the main concern of this helper. A minor performance impact compared to simply logging the events is to be expected.

## Running

The jar needs to be loaded for it to run. Assuming the jar is called `trace-event-logger-x.y.z.jar`, one would need to first build their java application with the jar in the *classpath* such as 

```console
user@host:~$ javac -cp trace-event-logger-x.y.z.jar my-project
```
	
`-cp`: loads the jar

and then, run it as 

```console
user@host:~$ java -Djava.util.logging.config.file=path/to/logging.properties -p bin:path/to/trace-event-logger-x.y.z.jar -m package/path/to.Main
```

`-Djava.util.logging.config.file`: the path of the `logging.properties`

`-p`: the packages, the location of the classes and the external logging jar

`-m`: the location of the main module to run.

## Handlers

There are two new `handler`s introduced.

* The AsyncFileHandler: `org.eclipse.tracecompass.traceeventlogger.AsyncFileHandler` in the logging properties. It handles serialization and writing to disk in a separate thread from the caller. Note: this will require explicitly killing a process when it exits as it is a separate thread.

* The SnapshotHandler: `org.eclipse.tracecompass.traceeventlogger.SnapshotHandler` in the logging properties. It writes all events to a fixed length queue (culling at the front when full) and dumps the entire queue to disk when a defined latency is hit, for example when a span lasts over 30 seconds.
